Classes
=======

Class Attributes
----------------

Classes are defined using the ``class`` keyword::

  class Person:
      pass

The simplest way to use a class is to add *class attributes* to it (similar to
static members from C++/Java). Attributes are accessed via the usual
``object.attribute`` syntax::

  Person.description = 'A living human'
  assert Person.description == 'A living human'

However, this way of creating class attributes is rarely used. You can also add
attributes to a class by placing assignments inside the ``class`` statement::

  class Person:
      count = 6930000000

  assert Person.count == 6930000000
  print Person.description  # no longer available

Note that the ``class`` statement created a new class object and assigned it to
the *Person* name. The previous class object assigned to *Person* had a
*description* attribute, but that class object was lost. This is similar to how
``def`` and normal assignments work.

Classes are essentially namespaces backed by dictionaries::

  print Person.__dict__
  Person.__dict__['someattr'] = 'some value'
  assert Person.someattr == 'some value'
  del Person.someattr
  assert 'someattr' not in Person.__dict__

You can also use the builtin functions :func:`getattr`, :func:`setattr`,
:func:`hasattr` and :func:`delattr` to access attributes::

  setattr(Person, 'someattr', 'some value')
  assert hasattr(Person, 'someattr')
  assert getattr(Person, 'someattr') == 'some value'
  delattr(Person, 'someattr')
  assert not hasattr(Person, 'someattr')


Instances
---------

Classes are also *instance* factories. To create instances, you can treat
classes like functions::

  john = Person()

This the equivalent of the Java statement ``Person john = new Person();``.

Instances can also have attributes (similar to non-static members in C++/Java)::

  john.age = 34
  assert john.age == 34
  assert getattr(john, 'age') == 34
  assert john.__dict__['age'] == 34

Instances store their class in a special attribute::

  assert john.__class__ is Person

You can create multiple instances for the same class::

  alice = Person()
  assert alice is not john
  assert alice.__class__ is john.__class__
  assert not hasattr(alice, 'age')


Inheritance
-----------

You can create *subclasses* (or *derived classes*) by listing the *superclasses*
(or *base classes*) as arguments to the ``class`` statement::

  class Base:
      pass

  class Derived(Base):
      pass

You can use :func:`issubclass` and :func:`isinstance` to test inheritance
relations (but don't `abuse them
<http://www.canonical.org/~kragen/isinstance/>`_)::

  assert issubclass(Derived, Base)
  assert issubclass(Derived, Derived)
  assert not issubclass(Base, Derived)

  class Unrelated:
      pass

  assert not issubclass(Derived, Unrelated)

  derived = Derived()
  assert isinstance(derived, Derived)
  assert isinstance(derived, Base)
  assert not isinstance(Base(), Derived)

You shouldn't normally need these two functions, because Python encourages `duck
typing`_. To find out more read `isinstance() considered harmful`_.

.. _duck typing: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duck_typing
.. _isinstance() considered harmful: http://www.canonical.org/~kragen/isinstance/

Python also supports multiple inheritance::

  class B1:
      pass

  class B2:
      pass

  class D(B1, B2):
      pass

  assert issubclass(D, B1) and issubclass(D, B2)

The tuple of base classes are stored in the special *__bases__* class
attribute::

  assert D.__bases__ == (B1, B2)
  assert B1.__bases__ == ()


Attribute Search
----------------

Accessing attributes via ``object.__dict__['name']`` does a normal dictionary
lookup.  However, ``object.name`` (or its equivalent ``getattr(object,
'name')``) triggers an *attribute search*.

An attribute search will look at the object's *__dict__*, but will continue the
search with the object's *__class__* (if the object is an instance) and continue
up the inheritance tree until the attribute is found or all possibilities are
exhausted.

Let's look at simple example::

  class B0:
      z = 0

  class B1(B0):
      x = 1
      y = 2

  class B2:
      y = 3
      z = 4

  class D(B1, B2):
      x = 5

  d_inst = D()
  d_inst.t = 6

The relations between instances and classes can be represented as a `directed
acyclic graph`_:

.. _directed acyclic graph: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph

.. digraph:: class1

   graph [rankdir=BT];
   edge [fontsize=7];
   D [shape=box];
   B0 [shape=box];
   B1 [shape=box];
   B2 [shape=box];

   B1 -> B0 [label="base"];
   D -> B1 [label="base"];
   D -> B2 [label="base"];
   d_inst -> D [label="instance"];

An attribute search for *d_inst* will try the nodes from this graph from bottom
to top and from left to right (the preordering from `depth-first search`_):

.. _depth-first search: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search

====== ============
Node   Attributes
====== ============
d_inst t = 6
D      x = 5
B1     x = 1, y = 2
B0     z = 0
B2     y = 3, z = 4
====== ============

Note that the order of the base classes affects attribute searches.

Now you can understand the results of the following attribute searches::

  assert d_inst.t == 6
  assert d_inst.x == 5
  assert d_inst.y == 2
  assert d_inst.z == 0
  assert D.z == 0
  assert B2.z == 4

Updating or deleting attributes directly update the object's *__dict__* (they
don't trigger a search)::

  obj.attribute = value
  setattr(obj, 'attribute', 'value')
  del obj.attribute
  delattr(obj, 'attribute')


Special attributes like *__bases__*, *__dict__*, *__class__* do not trigger
attribute searches.

Exercise
~~~~~~~~

Write a function which returns a list of instances and classes in the order used
by an attribute search:

.. function:: attrsearch_order(start)

where *start* is the starting point of the attribute search (instance or class).

Hints:

- To find out if an object is an instance or a class compare the return of
  :func:`type` with :data:`types.InstanceType` or :data:`types.ClassType`::

    import types
    assert type(d_inst) == types.InstanceType
    assert type(D) == types.ClassType

- You can keep track of processed nodes in a :class:`set`. If you implement the
  `depth-first search`_ recursively, you can make the function `reentrant`_ by
  using local variables for state and an inner function which does the real
  work.

.. _reentrant: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reentrant_(subroutine)

**Unit test**::

  def test_attrsearch_order():
      # the previous example
      class B0: pass
      class B1(B0): pass
      class B2: pass
      class D(B1, B2): pass
      d_inst = D()
      assert attrsearch_order(d_inst) == [d_inst, D, B1, B0, B2]

      # diamond inheritance
      class B0: pass
      class B1(B0): pass
      class B2(B0): pass
      class D(B1, B2): pass
      assert attrsearch_order(D) == [D, B1, B0, B2]


Methods
-------

Let's assume we have a *Person* class and a few instances::

  class Person:
      pass

  a = Person()
  a.first_name = 'John'
  a.last_name = 'Smith'

  b = Person()
  b.first_name = 'Jane'
  b.last_name = 'Doe'

and we want to define a function which takes a *Person* instance and returns the
full name::

  def full_name(person):
      return person.first_name + " " + person.last_name

  assert full_name(a) == 'John Smith'
  assert full_name(b) == 'Jane Doe'

This works, but it's a bit clumsy to have to define the function in the global
scope, so let's make it a class attribute::

  class Person:
      def full_name(person):
          return person.first_name + " " + person.last_name

  a = Person()
  a.first_name = 'John'
  a.last_name = 'Smith'

  b = Person()
  b.first_name = 'Jane'
  b.last_name = 'Doe'

  assert Person.full_name(a) == 'John Smith'
  assert Person.full_name(b) == 'Jane Doe'

This works as expected, but we could make this even better by taking advantage
of the attribute search: we can get the function object we need by starting the
attribute search from the instance: ``a.full_name``.

There's an extra bit of magic embedded in attribute searches when it starts from
an instance and the result is a function and a class attribute: the instance is
passed as the first argument to the function automatically::

  assert Person.full_name(a) == a.full_name()
  assert Person.full_name(b) == b.full_name()

This works even if the function object is saved for later use::

  f = a.full_name
  print f()

How does *f* remember to pass the correct instance as the first parameter? It
turns out that the attribute search returns a different kind of object::

  print a.full_name
  assert a.full_name.im_self is a
  assert a.full_name.im_class is Person
  assert a.full_name.im_func is Person.__dict__['full_name']

This kind of object is called *bound method*. Bound methods are objects that
combine a class (*im_class*), an instance (*im_self*) and a function
(*im_func*)::

  assert a.full_name() == a.full_name.im_func(a.full_name.im_self)

*Unbound methods* are created when the search starts from a class object. They
are similar to bound methods except they have no *im_self*::

  print Person.full_name
  assert Person.full_name.im_class is Person
  assert Person.full_name.im_func is Person.__dict__['full_name']

  assert Person.full_name(a) == Person.full_name.im_func(a)

Method objects are only created when the result comes from a class attribute::

  def f():
      return 'fake'

  b.full_name = f
  assert b.full_name is f
  assert b.full_name() == 'fake'

By convention, the first parameter for instance methods is usually called
*self*. It has the same meaning as *this* from Java/C++. Note that you can't
omit *self* when referring to instance attributes from a method (otherwise you
will create/update a local name).

To create a constructor just add a method called **__init__**. Let's look at the
complete example written in the usual Python style::

  class Person:
      def __init__(self, first_name, last_name):
          self.first_name = first_name
          self.last_name = last_name

      def full_name(self):
          return self.first_name + " " + self.last_name

  a = Person('John', 'Smith')
  b = Person('Jane', 'Doe')

  assert a.full_name() == 'John Smith'
  assert b.full_name() == 'Jane Doe'


Method Overriding
-----------------

The attribute search order is also called *method resolution order* (*mro*)
because its main purpose is to make method overriding possible::

  class Base:
      def f(self):
          return 'base'

  class Derived(Base):
      def f(self):
          return 'derived'

  b = Base()
  d = Derived()

  assert b.f() == 'base'
  assert d.f() == 'derived'

``d.f()`` will call the ``Derived.f`` function because *Derived* comes before
*Base* in the method resolution order for *d*.

To call the base class version of an overridden method, simply start the
attribute search from the base class::

  class Base:
      def f(self):
          return 'base'

  class Derived(Base):
      def f(self):
          return Base.f(self) + 'derived'

  b = Base()
  d = Derived()

  assert b.f() == 'base'
  assert d.f() == 'basederived'

You can find out the method resolution order by calling :func:`inspect.getmro`
on a class object::

  import inspect
  class B0: pass
  class B1(B0): pass
  class B2(B0): pass
  class D(B1, B2): pass
  assert inspect.getmro(D) == (D, B1, B0, B2)


Exercise
~~~~~~~~

Write the following classes:

.. class:: Person(name)

   .. attribute:: count

   Class attribute counting how many Person objects were ever created.

   .. method:: get_info()

   Returns a string containing the name of the person.

.. class:: Employee(name, title, salary)

   This class should inherit from :class:`Person`.

   .. method:: get_info()

   Returns a string containing the *name*, *title* and *salary*.

When overriding methods **__init__** and **get_info**, try to reuse the
superclass method (to avoid duplication).

**Unit test**::

  def test_employee():
      count = Person.count

      a = Person('A')
      assert a.get_info() == 'A'
      assert Person.count == count + 1

      b = Employee('John Smith', 'Engineer', 200)
      assert b.get_info() == 'John Smith Engineer 200'
      assert Person.count == count + 2


Static Methods
--------------

You might want to create methods which are applicable to the whole class as
opposed to one instance (static methods in C++/Java). Unfortunately it is not
possible to use unbound methods without a parameter::

  class Base:
      count = 0

      def get_base_count():
          return Base.count

      def __init__(self):
          Base.count += 1

  b = Base()
  assert Base.__dict__['get_base_count']() == 1
  assert Base.get_base_count() == 1       # unbound method
  assert b.get_base_count() == 1          # bound method

The last two asserts fail because the attribute searches for **get_base_count**
return method objects which require an instance as the first argument.

The :func:`staticmethod` function can be used (as a decorator) to bypass the
transformation of functions from a class **__dict__** into bound or unbound
methods::

  class Base:
      count = 0

      @staticmethod
      def get_base_count():
          return Base.count

      def __init__(self):
          Base.count += 1

  b = Base()
  assert Base.get_base_count() == 1
  assert b.get_base_count() == 1


"Private" Attributes
--------------------

There is no access control for attributes, but by convention, a single leading
underscore in the name is an indication that the attribute is an implementation
detail and could change at any time.

However, there's a feature called *name mangling*: Any identifier of the form
``__attribute`` (starts with ``__``, but doesn't end with ``__``) is textually
replaced with ``_classname__attribute``, where ``classname`` is the name of the
class currently being defined::

  class A:
      # define A._A__count
      __count = 0
      def __init__(self):
          # update A._A__count
          A.__count += 1

  class B:
      # define B._B__count
      __count = 0
      def __init__(self):
          # update B._B__count
          B.__count += 1

          # update A._B__count: not possible!
          # A.__count += 1

The attributes can still be used by manually mangling their names::

  A()
  B()
  B()

  assert A._A__count == 1
  assert B._B__count == 2
  A._A__count = 100
  assert A._A__count == 100

Name mangling is very rarely used.


Operator Overloading
--------------------

Any operation invoked using built-in Python functions or operators can be
overridden by defining methods with special names. In fact, you already saw one
example: the class constructor. The "call" syntax ``Class(*args, **kwargs)``
is translated into ``Class.__init__(self, *args, **kwargs)``.


The full list of methods that respond to special syntax is available in the
Python documentation: `special method names`_. Let's look at the most useful methods.

.. _special method names: http://docs.python.org/reference/datamodel.html#special-method-names


String Conversion: __str__ and __repr__
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These methods are called in response to the built-in functions :func:`str` and
:func:`repr`. Print automatically calls str for any argument which is not a
string object::

  class Person:
      def __init__(self, first_name, last_name):
          self.first_name = first_name
          self.last_name = last_name

  print Person('John', 'Doe')

The default string representation is not very useful. Let's change it::

  class Person:
      def __init__(self, first_name, last_name):
          self.first_name = first_name
          self.last_name = last_name

      def __str__(self):
          return self.first_name + ' ' + self.last_name

      def __repr__(self):
          return '<Person: %s %s>' % (self.first_name, self.last_name)

  p = Person('John', 'Doe')
  print p
  print str(p)
  print repr(p)

When evaluating ``str(object)`` Python will fall back to **__repr__** if
**__str__** is not defined (but not the other way around).

The Python shell will print the :func:`repr` form for the results of typed
expressions.

Exercise
++++++++

Change the :class:`Person` and :class:`Employee` classes defined earlier to
respond to :func:`str` instead of :meth:`Person.get_info`. Also make them
respond to :func:`repr`.

**Unit test**::

  def test_employee2():
      count = Person.count

      a = Person('A')
      assert str(a) == 'A'
      assert repr(a) == "<Person: name='A'>"

      b = Employee('John Smith', 'Engineer', 200)
      assert str(b) == 'John Smith Engineer 200'
      assert repr(b) == "<Employee: name='John Smith', title='Engineer', salary=200>"

  test_employee2()


Boolean Conversion: __nonzero__ and __len__
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can test if a list is empty or not by using the list with ``if`` or
``while``::

  a = [1, 2, 3]
  if a:
      print 'not empty'
  while a:
      print a.pop()

You can enable this behavior in your class by defining the **__nonzero__**
method::

  class Person:
      def __init__(self, name, alive=True):
          self.name = name
          self.alive = alive

      def die(self):
          self.alive = False

      def __nonzero__(self):
          return self.alive

  john = Person('John')
  assert bool(john) == True
  if john:
      print 'John is alive!'
  john.die()
  assert bool(john) == False
  if not john:
      print 'John is dead.'

As you can see, the :func:`bool` function also uses this special method.

If **__nonzero__** is not defined, Python falls back to **__len__** (which is
normally called in response to :func:`len`).


Comparison Operators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
========== ===========
Expression Method call
========== ===========
x == y     x.__eq__(y)
x != y     x.__ne__(y)
x < y      x.__lt__(y)
x > y      x.__gt__(y)
x <= y     x.__le__(y)
x >= y     x.__ge__(y)
========== ===========

You can use :func:`functools.total_ordering` to avoid defining all 6 methods.


Exercise
++++++++

Overload the comparison operators to compare two employees by salary, title and
name.

**Unit test**::

  def test_employee3():
      tb = Employee('Thomas Brin', 'CEO',        500)
      js = Employee('John Smith',  'Engineer',   200)
      jd = Employee('John Doe',    'Engineer',   200)
      ba = Employee('Brian Adams', 'Contractor', 200)

      assert tb == tb
      assert tb >= tb
      assert tb <= tb
      assert tb != js

      assert js > jd
      assert tb > js
      assert js >= jd
      assert tb >= js

      assert jd < js
      assert js < tb
      assert jd <= js
      assert js <= tb

      assert sorted([tb, js, jd, ba]) == [ba, jd, js, tb]


Call Expressions: __call__
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is similar to **__init__**, but for instances: ``instance(*args,
**kwargs)`` calls ``instance.__call__(*args, **kwargs)``. Here's a rewrite of
the incrementer from :ref:`nested functions` with classes::

  class incrementer:
      def __init__(self, step=1):
          self.value = 0
          self.step = step

      def __call__(self):
          self.value += self.step
          return self.value

  a = incrementer()
  print a()
  print a()
  print a()

  b = incrementer(5)
  print b()
  print b()
  print b()

Defining **__call__** will make instances for that class behave like functions,
so you can pass them as callbacks to library functions. This is useful
especially when you need to preserve state between calls, like in the example
above.

To find out if an object is callable you can use the built-in function
:func:`callable`.
